wfuse” in the literature). The Rice J-integral model is the canonical global approach; however, this approach suffers from limitations, such that it cannot predict crack initiation and propagation, and the J- integral is also not a material property as it strongly depends on the specimen geometry [15]. These problems were rectified by the J-Q integral approach; however, this approach, in turn, has the limitation that it does not apply to complex geometries [16]. Further developments in this family of models, such as the critical crack tip opening displacement or crack tip opening angle, share the same limitations [17, 18]. These models have been implemented in finite element solvers with remeshing techniques needed to model the crack propagation, though eXtended Finite Element Method (X-FEM) strategies have been designed to mitigate the need for remeshing.
The limitations of the global approach have led to the development of local approaches. These methods characterise the fracture zone in more physical detail. These models can, in turn, be split into surface models (cohesive zone models), where fracture occurs on a surface, and volume models, where damage or degradation occurs in a volume. A limitation of cohesive zone models is that they often require a pre-defined crack path and typically exhibit strong mesh dependency. With these limitations in mind, this work focuses on the volume or continuum damage mechanics approaches, stemming from the work of Lemaitre [19, 20], and micro-mechanical approaches, as originally proposed by Gurson-Tvergaard-Needleman (GTN) [21, 22]. A review of these approaches is left to Section 3. Within the past 15 years, an alternative volume ductile damage model has emerged, known as the phase field model approach [23–27]. This approach involves diffusing the sharp crack over a continuum. Models of this form are also implemented in this work and are described in Section 3.
In recent years, there has been an increasing interest in exploring the finite volume method for structural application and the interested reader is directed to a recent review by Cardiff and Demirdˇzi ́c [28]. While the volume damage models have been implemented within finite element frameworks, they have seen little attention within the finite volume community. As shown in this work, the segregated Picard iteration solution methodology, commonly employed in the finite volume method, demonstrates favourable convergence properties for the highly nonlinear material behaviour experienced in wire drawing.
2
Although both Eulerian and Lagrangian approaches have been adopted for metal forming, the Lagrangian approach is now commonly favoured due to its ability to easily capture elastic effects, e.g. residual stresses and spring back, notwithstanding its limitation of mesh deterioration for severe deformations. Nonetheless, for continuous processes such as wire drawing, Lagrangian approaches require the user to select a sufficiently long initial domain (e.g., initial wire length) so that steady- state phenomena of interest can be examined. Eulerian approaches do not have such a limitation as the workpiece inlet and outlet (i.e., wire upstream and downstream boundaries) are static in space. To combine the advantages of both, the current work proposes a Lagrangian approach with novel Eulerian-style boundary conditions, which allow the wire upstream and downstream boundaries to stay fixed in space.
Three main contributions are proposed in this work: (i) Nascent damage model implementations within a cell-centred finite volume framework, including a novel Lemaitre damage formulation for wire drawing; (ii) Eulerian-style boundary conditions for continuous forming processes, where mesh layers are added and removed at the workpiece upstream and downstream boundaries. (iii) A segregated large strain pressure-displacement finite volume formulation, where scaled Rhie- Chow stabilisation terms are proposed for quelling pressure oscillations while minimising over- smoothing of the damage fields. All implementations are performed in the solids4foam toolbox [29, 30] for the open-source C++ software OpenFOAM, building on previous work related to metal forming [11, 13]. Code and cases are publicly shared on GitHub at http://github.com/ awhelanUCD/solids4foam.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows: Section 2 describes the mathematical model and presents the finite volume numerical method, where details of the elastoplastic damage laws are left to Section 3. The implemented damage procedures are verified in Section 4, and applied to wire drawing in Section 5. The article ends with a summary of the main conclusions.
~